Tenant
Emergency
Procedures
Introduction
This document was prepared to provide you with basic instructions related to
emergencies that could occur at Great Lakes Crossing Outlets. Please review all
information with your staff and newly hired personnel. The Security Department
recommends you conduct annual training with all employees.
Throughout the year, Mall Management will conduct drills to test our emergency
readiness and may request your participation to ensure your readiness and knowledge
of emergency procedures.
If you are unclear about anything in this document, please call the Mall Security Office
at (248) 454-5015. We will work with you to ensure that you have a comprehensive
understanding of the emergency procedures.
Important Phone numbers
Auburn Hills Police Department and Fire/Emergency: 911
Auburn Hills Police Department Non-Emergency: (248) 370-9444
Auburn Hills Fire Department Non-Emergency: (248) 370-9461
Great Lakes Crossing Outlets Security Office: (248) 454-5015
Great Lakes Crossing Outlets Management Office: (248) 454-5010
Michigan Poison Control Center: 1 (800) 222-1222
Perparing
for an
EMERGENCY
Have a plan for all types of emergencies
Train all your employees in your emergency plans
Have plans accessible for employees to review
Know evacuation routes
Perform surprise drills with employees to test responses
Have emergency phone numbers posted or saved in your phone
Keep store info and phone numbers up-to-date with mall management
and security office
Medical Emergency
For medical emergencies, call 911
immediately and provide the following
information:
Your location and/or location of the emergency
Type of injury
Number of people injured
Condition of the injured/ill person(s)
Weapons or dangers involved
Be prepared to answer a series of predetermined
questions utilized by 9-1-1 Dispatch Operators
After calling 911, direct another employee
to call the GLCO Mall Security Office at
(248) 454-5015.
Minor Medical
Emergency
If someone is injured and does not require
paramedics, call the GLCO Mall Security
Office at (248) 454-5015 and provide the
following information:
Your location and/or location of the medical
situation
Type of injury
Number of people injured
Condition of the injured/ill person(s)
OnSolve Emergency
Notifcation System
Updating your Emergency
Contact List
In addition to the public address system, GLCO
utilizes the OnSolve notification system to alert
tenants of important information in the event of an
emergency. OnSolve rapidly contacts every store at
GLCO simultaneously to ensure all tenants are
notified of important information immediately.
In the event of an emergency, OnSolve will call your
store to communicate emergency procedure
information. Listen to the entire OnSolve message
to ensure you and your staff follow the correct
emergency procedures.
In the event of an emergency, GLCO will use
OnSolve to provide follow-up information to
tenants. Do not call the Security Department to
follow up.
In an emergency, OnSolve is the only way the mall
may be able to communicate with you.
Please make sure you update your emergency
contact numbers for your managers and staff as
changes occur. This would include updating which
members of your store’s management team should
be contacted in the event of an emergency.
Please note that GLCO Security Office also uses the
provided phone numbers to contact your store’s
designated emergency staff in the event of a storespecific situation, such as an after-hours
emergency, water leak or fire.
Forms to update the contact list are available in the
Security Office and on the Tenant Portal Website.
Severe Weather
Severe Thunderstorm
Warning
Tornado Watch Tornado Warning
A severe thunderstorm
warning is issued when
an approaching storm
contains dangerously
high winds or large hail.
A tornado watch is issued
when the GLCO Security
Office is notified by the
U.S. Weather Service that
conditions are favorable
for the development of a
tornado. Please note that
a tornado watch does not
require any immediate
action on your part.
A tornado warning is issued when
the GLCO Security Office is notified
by the U.S. Weather Service, or if a
tornado has been sighted by
spotters or indicated on radar.
The GLCO Mall Security team may
issue an OnSolve notification for
shelter-in-place procedures to be
implemented in the event of a
tornado warning. Be prepared to
take shelter in the designated
shelter areas.
Security will request that
customers or employees enter the
20’ wide corridors on either side of
the center.
If the Mall is made aware of a severe weather threat, you will be notified through OnSolve.
Do not call the Security phone line for updates as this blocks other needed communication.
Abduction
If you witness an abduction or attempted abduction, call 911 immediately.
Provide a description of the person abducted and offender
Provide the location and direction of travel
Do not confront the offender
After you call 911 immediately call GLCO Security at (248) 454-5015 with the same information.
Lost/Missing Children
In the event of a lost child, call the GLCO Mall Security office immediately at (248) 454-5015 and follow
your store’s policy if applicable.
Provide the GLCO Security team with the last known location of the child and a description of the child:
Name
Age
Hair color
Clothing description
Ask the parents to remain with you until mall Security arrives. If you have a lost child in your store, call
Security immediately at (248) 454-5015 and keep the child with you until they arrive.
Suspicious Person/Activity
If you observe someone acting in a suspicious manner, such as taking unusual photos and/or video or
displaying unusual behavior, contact GLCO Security immediately at (248) 454-5015. If you feel the
suspicious behavior may present a danger, call 911 first, then contact the UTC Security team.
Provide a detailed description of the person(s), including race and clothing
Describe the suspicious activity
Provide the last known location of the person(s), including direction of travel
Do not confront the person(s)
Armed Subject
If you observe, have concerns, or are alerted to a person with a weapon inside the mall, call GLCO Security office
at (248) 454-5015. If you are in immediate danger, call 911 first, then contact GLCO Security office at
(941) 552-7001.
When reporting, be prepared to provide a detailed description and the last known location of the armed
person.
If you feel you are in imminent danger and can safely get away from the danger, you should do so.
Implement lockdown procedures if the armed subject is outside of your store and call 911.
Do not attempt to confront or attempt to disarm the person
BOMB THREAT
If you receive a bomb threat by telephone, try to obtain as much information from the caller as possible. When the caller hangs up, take
the following action:
Call 911 to report the threat.
Call GLCO Security office at (248) 454-5015 to report the threat.
When the police and GLCO Security arrive, you may be instructed to conduct a search of your store for a suspicious item or packages.
If you observe a suspicious package or item, keep customers and staff away from it.
The Police or GLCO Security team will provide instructions through OnSolve if the decision is made to evacuate the mall.
If you are notified of a bomb threat by GLCO Security team, follow the instructions from security and police personnel.
You may be asked to assist with a search of your store for a suspicious item or package(s).
If you observe a suspicious item or package, do not touch it! Keep customers and staff away from it.
If necessary, an order to evacuate will be given by police or security.
The Auburn Hills Police Department team or GLCO Security office will provide instructions if the decision is made to evacuate the mall
through the OnSolve emergency notification system.
By Telephone
Mall Notification
Hazardous Materials
Release
Chemical Spill
There are many types of hazardous materials which are used
in everyday life. Some examples include natural gas,
compressed gases, cleaning solvents, and aerosols.
Depending on the severity and location of the release, follow
evacuation procedures or shelter-in-place procedures if so
instructed.
Keep away from the contaminated area. If you are in
imminent danger, evacuate the area.
If people are injured or show signs of illness, call 911
immediately then call the GLCO Security office at
(248) 454-5015.
Follow the directions of police/fire personnel or GLCO
Security team.
In the event of a chemical spill, contact the GLCO
Security office at (248) 454-5015 and provide the
following information:
Spill location
Any injuries or contamination as a result
Type of chemical, if known
MSDS if available
Do not attempt to clean up the spill.
GLCO Security team will provide additional
instructions.
FIRE
If you observe fire or smoke, immediately evacuate the area and call 911, then call the GLCO
Security office at (248) 454-5015.
Direct customers and employees toward the exits of your store
The fire department, police, or GLCO Security team will determine if the mall will be evacuated
In the event of an evacuation:
Follow the directions of GLCO Security or emergency personnel
If time allows, and the fire is not inside of your store, close the gate or doors to your store
If you elect to attempt to extinguish the fire yourself, be sure that you know how to use the store fire
extinguisher before using it, and if the fire is still present after using one extinguisher, you should
evacuate the area.
Always ensure your staff knows the locations of the closest fire exits near your store.
Utility Failure
If you experience a power loss in your store, contact the GLCO Security office at (248) 454-5015.
Follow your store’s policy for a power failure. If power returns, contact UTC Security and inform them that power has been
restored.
If the power failure affects the entire mall, you will be contacted by GLCO Security and provided with instructions. We
recommend you move customers to the common areas of the mall and lock your doors. You should be prepared to
shelter-in-place or evacuate if needed.
Contact GLCO Security at (248) 454-5015 if you experience a water leak or a loss of water to your store.
If you smell a faint gas odor (rotten egg smell), contact GLCO Security at (248) 454-5015. The situation will be assessed
accordingly. You should be prepared to evacuate if needed.
Power Loss
Water Leak
Gas Leak
SHOTS FIRED / ACTIVE SHOOTER
If you hear gunfire, DO NOT GO SEE WHAT IS HAPPENING.
Options include:
RUN / ESCAPE– If you are in imminent danger and you can get out, flee the area.
HIDE / LOCKDOWN– If you cannot flee the area. Initiate lockdown procedures and secure yourself in a safe
and impenetrable area.
FIGHT – Only as a last resort if the previous two options are not available to you.
R E M E M B E R . . . R U N , H I D E , F I G H T
Avoid calling GLCO Security when in lockdown unless you have a medical emergency.You will be updated through
OnSolve or by authorities directly.
Once in lockdown, remain in your store until police/fire personnel or GLCO Security come to you.
If you leave your store and encounter law enforcement, follow their directions and put your hands in the air.
Do not attempt to leave in your vehicle. Have a designated location for evacuation.
You may be required to return and secure your store when the event is over. Make sure your emergency contact
information is up to date.
Suspicious Item / Package
If you observe a suspicious item or package, DO NOT TOUCH OR MOVE IT and direct others to remain clear
of the item or package.
Call GLCO Security immediately at (248) 454-5015 and provide the following information:
Description of the item or package
Location of the item or package
If the item is attended/unattended
If you observed anyone put the object down, obtain a description of the person(s) and their direction of
travel
The GLCO Security team will respond to assess the object and take appropriate precautions if needed. The
Auburn Hills Police Department will be contacted by GLCO Security to determine if an evacuation is
warranted.
GLCO will contact stores through OnSolve, if, an evacuation is needed.
Shelter In Place Procedures
Recommended Action(s):
Follow instructions from the GLCO Security team.
Close and lock your doors. Seek emergency shelter in a rear corridor or
designated area. Your store could be that area.
Direct customers to follow you to shelter areas.
If you choose not to leave your store, take refuge in a back room or
hallway, away from glass, windows and displays. If someone wishes to
leave the center, make no attempt to stop them.
Keep quiet and out of sight.
If possible, turn off the lights and stereo.
Remain in place and wait for instructions from police/fire personnel, GLCO Security
or OnSolve.
Do not open your doors to release anyone until you are notified to do so by
police/fire
personnel or GLCO Security.
Turn cell phones on vibrate.
Do not panic.
Be prepared to evacuate the mall.
A shelter in place may be
activated when:
Severe weather warning
Tornado warning
Hazardous materials
release
Shots fired
Hostage situation
Means of Notification:
GLCO Public Address
System
OnSolve
Auburn Hills Police
Department
Evacuation / Mall Closing
Recommended Action(s):
Follow instructions of GLCO Security team.
Direct customers to your store’s nearest exit.
If time allows, lock your register(s) and your doors.
There will be a location established for separated family
members to reunite – listen to all
announcements and instructions to ensure you are
aware of them.
Have a designated location for all employees to meet if
there is an evacuation. The meeting location should be a
minimum of 300 feet from the mall.
An evacuation or mall
closing may be
activated for the
following reasons:
Active Shooter
Armed subject
Hostage situation
Weather Emergency
Power Failure
Fire/Gas Leak
Means of Notification:
GLCO Public Address
System
OnSolve



Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall- PaCE – January 2019
EMERGENCY RESPONSE GUIDE
Westfield Mall – PaCE Campus –
Quick Reference
Who to Call ……………………………….3
Active Shooter/ALICE Training………… 4
Evacuation ……………………………….11
Fire, Smoke, Explosion…………………13
Reporting an Emergency……………….15
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 2
Table of Contents
Who to Call in an Emergency ............................................................ 1
Active Shooter/ALICE Training.......................................................... 4
Power Failure/Other Electrical Emergencies .................................. 7
Earthquake……… ....................................................................... 8
Campus Guide/Map........................................................................ 9
Evacuation.................................................................................... 11
Evacuation Map ............................................................................ 11
Fire, Smoke, Explosion ................................................................ 13
Handling Bomb Threats ................................................................ 14
Reporting an Emergency .............................................................. 15
Medical and Mental Health Emergencies ...................................... 16
Injuries .......................................................................................... 16
Animal Incidents ........................................................................... 17
Crime Reporting............................................................................ 18
Violent Situations .......................................................................... 19
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 3
Who to call in an Emergency
Emergency Numbers
Public Safety Department Campus Extension………2111
Public Safety Department Outside Line…...760-341-2111
Emergencies………………………………….…………..911
Non-Emergencies ………………………….…………..2111
Nurse Non-Emergency……………………....760-776-7211
******It is recommend you place Public Safety Department phone number
760-341-2111 on your Speed Dial of your cell phone – all you have to do is
push one button and you can call the Public Safety Department.
Note: If you call 911 from the classroom telephone, the Public Safety
Department is automatically notified.
 If you dial from your cell phone the call will go directly to Police and Fire.
To report other problems on campus facilities, call Public Safety
Department at extension 2111 or via cell-phone at 760-341-2111
 Electrical Outage
 Gas
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 4
ALICE Response Plan
Traditional response to an active shooter incident has been to shelter in place and wait
for law enforcement official to arrive. While this type of response is not
completely wrong, case studies of several active shooter/killer incidents have
shown that using only this response has resulted in an increase in casualties. The
district has adopted the “ALICE” response plan to assist you in your response
should this type of incident occur. Persons may or may not receive advance
warning of an active shooter/killer. A witness, personal observation or the sound
of gunshots may be the only alert you receive, leaving little time to react. If you
hear the sound of gunshots, you should begin to take necessary precautions.
In the event of an active shooter emergency, the “ALICE” response plan to assist you in
determining the best options available to survive an attack. The “ALICE”
response does not follow a set of prescribed actions, and you may not need to
utilize all of the five steps when confronting an active shooter. Your survival is
the most important outcome.
“ALICE” is an acronym for 5 steps you can utilize in order to increase your chances of
surviving a surprise attack by an Active Shooter. Again, it is important to
remember that the “ALICE” response does not follow a set of actions you “shall,
must, will” do when confronted with an Active Shooter.
Alert
 Any number of things can alert you to a shooter situation:
o Gunfire.
o Witnesses.
o Unusual commotion on campus.
o Phone/Text alerts.
Lockdown
 A lockdown is a semi-secure starting point from which to make your survival
decisions. If you decide not to evacuate, secure the room.
o Lock the door.
o Cover any windows in the door if possible.
o Tie down the door if possible using belts, purse straps, shoe laces, etc.
o Barricade the door with anything available (desks, chairs, file cabinets.).
o Look for alternative escape routes (windows, additional doors).
o Call 911.
o Move out of the doorway and windows in case gunfire comes through it.
o Silence or place cellphones on vibrate.
o Once secured, do not open the door for anyone. Unfamiliar voices may be
the shooter attempting to lure you out. Police will enter the room when the
situation is over.
o Gather weapons (coffee cups, chairs, books, pens, etc.) and mentally
prepare to defend yourself or others.
o Put yourself in position to surprise the active shooter should they enter the
room.
o
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 5
Inform
 Use any means necessary to pass on real time information.
o Use plain language.
o Derived from 911 calls, video surveillance, etc.
o Who, what, when where and how information.
o Helps people in or around the areas area to make common sense decisions.
o Can be given by Flash Alerts, PA Announcements, public safety radio
speakers.
Counter
 Use of simple, proactive techniques should you be confronted by an active
shooter.
o Anything can be a weapon.
o Throw things at the shooter's head to disrupt his aim.
o Create as much noise as possible.
o Attack in a group (swarm).
o Grab the shooter's limbs and head. Take the shooter to the ground and
hold him there.
o Fight dirty: Bite, kick, gouge eyes, etc.
o Run around the room and create chaos.
o If you have control of the shooter call 911 and tell the police where you
are and listen to their commands when officers arrive on the scene.
o Do not touch the weapon. Secure weapon inside trash can if possible.
Evacuate
 Remove yourself from the danger zone as quickly as possible
o Decide if you can safely evacuate.
o Run in a zigzag pattern as fast as you can.
o Do not stop running until you are far away from the scene.
o Bring something to throw at the shooter should you encounter him.
o Consider if a fall from a window will kill you.
o Break out windows (top corner) and attempt to quickly clear glass from
the frame.
o Consider using belts, clothing or other items as an improvised rope to
shorten the distance you would fall.
o Hang by your hands from the window ledge to shorten your drop.
o Attempt to drop into shrubs, mulch or grass to lessen the chance of injury.
o Do not attempt to drive from the area.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 6
What to Expect from Responding Police Officers
 Police are trained to proceed immediately to the area in which shots were last
heard. Their purpose is to stop the shooting quickly.
 Responding officers will normally be in teams. They may be dressed in regular
patrol uniforms, or they may be wearing external bulletproof vests, kevlar
helmets, and other tactical equipment. The officers will be armed with guns.
Regardless of how they appear, remain calm, do as the officers tell you, and do
not be afraid of them.
 Responding Police will have their weapons drawn and ready for use. They do not
know exactly who the shooter/killer is and will probably point weapons at you.
Just remain calm and follow any directions they may give you. You may be asked
questions, patted down, and given orders to exit certain ways.
 Put down anything you may be carrying and keep your hands visible at all times.
 Do not point anything at Law Enforcement.
 The first officers will not stop to aid injured people. Other officers and emergency
medical personnel will follow to remove injured persons. Be prepared to have to
provide first aid. Think outside the box. Tampons and feminine napkins can be
used to stop blood loss. Shoes laces and belts can be used to secure tourniquets.
Weighted shoes can be tied around a person’s head to immobilize it. Remember it
may be several hours until can safely move an injured person. The actions you
take immediately to treat victims may save their life.
 Keep in mind that after you have escaped to a safer location, the entire area is still
a crime scene.
 Police will usually not let anyone leave until the situation is fully under control
and all witnesses have been identified and questioned.
 Until you are released, remain where authorities designate.
 Law Enforcement can take hours to clear a building. Stay calm and be patient.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 7
Power Failure/Other Electrical Emergencies
 Stay calm
 Keep emergency exits clear
 If power is not restored in approximately 30 minutes, current classes are
cancelled. Faculty members should use their best judgment.
 If decision is made to cancel classes a call will be made on the Campus Wide
Emergency Broadcast System.
 FACULTY: Leave classroom if necessary
 Communication will come through room intercom or through Public Safety
Officers.
 During a power failure, report power failures, downed wires or other
emergencies; direct everyone to avoid all downed wires.
 CONTACTS:
* Public Safety Department &
 Emergency Preparedness:
 2111 from a Campus Phone
 or 760-341-2111
* Maintenance:
 2551 from a Campus Phone
 Or 760-773-2551
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 8
Earthquake
1. Stay calm: do not panic and run.
2. Remain where you are whether indoors or outdoors.
3. INDOORS:
a. DUCK under a desk or sturdy table. Stay away from windows,
bookcases, and other heavy objects that could fall.
b. Stay under COVER until the shaking stops.
c. Hold onto the desk or table. If it moves, move with it.
d. Do not use the elevators. Fire alarms or sprinklers may come on.
4. Work with Public Safety Department & Emergency Preparedness in
determining if evacuation is necessary. If further review is needed to initiate
an evacuation announcement, contact a Dean, Vice President or the
President. Use good judgment.
5. Remain calm and await instructions from the Command Post. Assist with
evacuation, campus traffic, etc. Use good judgment.
6. Normally, do not evacuate until specifically directed to do so. Evacuation
routes are displayed on the map posted within this document.
7. In the event of a major earthquake, an Emergency Treatment Center will be
established in the parking lot.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 9
Campus Guide/Map
College of the Desert
 PaCE
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 10
Evacuation
Procedures for Instructional/Office Staff on Attendance Tracking
The primary causes for evacuation will be fire or earthquake. Each
instructor/area coordinator must be prepared to react quickly and properly.
Each instructor/area coordinator should have an accurate accounting of
attendance/Census Reports.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 11
PROCEDURES:
1. Remain calm and determine the nature and location of the disaster
without leaving the immediate area.
Evacuation (page 2)
Emergency Assembly Areas:
 Northside Assembly Area: The evacuation point is the parking lot to the north
of the cinema.
 If the Westside Assembly Area: The evacuation point is through the double
doors east of the mall into the parking lot.
2. Staff: Should remain with students until further direction is given. This
direction may come in a variety of ways depending upon the nature of the
event which caused the evacuation. Direction may be given by oral or
written word from the Incident Commander or Designee.
3. In all cases, be certain that: injured and disabled are evacuated and cared
for; all students and staff are accounted for; and the alarm has been
sounded if you or someone in your class was the first to discover the
potential disaster.
4. Completed “Census Report” must be turned in as soon as possible to the
Vice President, Student Services and Vice President, Administrative
Services.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 12
Fire, Smoke, Explosion
WHAT TO DO:
1. PULL ALARM – This AUTOMATICALLY SUMMONS Fire
Department. If an alarm is pulled and sounding THEN YOU MUST
EVACUATE THE BUILDING.
2. Call and report fire to Mall Security at……………….. (760)250-2172
Public Safety Department. ……….……….…………….760-341-2111
3. If the fire is easily extinguishable, attempt to extinguish it. Fire
extinguishers are located near the exits. You have a choice on each
incident to fight the fire or flee. Learn where the two closest fire
extinguishers are near your work area.
4. Evacuate the building if necessary, closing the fire doors (do not
lock).
5. Proceed to designated area on the campus – see attached maps.
Responsibility of Supervisors, Managers, and Faculty:
The supervisor, manager, and instructor are to supervise the clearing of his/her
area during an emergency evacuation, in an orderly manner using the
designated evacuation paths to the designated safety areas. Attendance should
be taken of each area evacuated. With faculty this will be the class roster. With
area coordinators this will be the area staffing list.
Assembly areas are displayed on the map posted within this document. If the
Emergency Alarm sounds, evacuate the building. In extreme situations,
evacuation should take place to the evacuation areas designated on the building
maps located in each classroom. If the fire alarm is terminated, work with the
Mall Security/Fire Department to determine if the building is all clear. The most
senior Public Safety Officer will direct them back into their respective classrooms.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 13
Handling Bomb Threats
1. Always be prepared to write the instant the phone rings. Record the exact
words of the threat in writing. Do not panic. Remain calm and professional
at all times. Ask the following questions:
How many bombs are there?
Where exactly are the bombs?
When will the bombs be detonated?
What kind of devices are they?
Are the bombs booby trapped? How?
Why did the caller select us as a target?
Who or what groups are involved?
2. Do not ask for identification of the caller until all of this information has been
obtained.
3. Listen carefully and note the caller’s characteristics:
Sex (male or female)
Approximate age (child, teen, adult)
Nationality
Accent or regional voice inflections
Education level
Mental attitude (calm, laughing, deliberate, angry, excited)
Rate of speech (slow, fast)
Voice volume (loud, soft)
Voice clarity (clear, muffled, disguised)
Unusual pronunciation (lisp, impediment, stuttering)
Use of words (appropriate? swearing? disjointed?)
Background noises (other voices, radio/stereo, street outdoor
sounds, cars, horns)
Restaurant/bar sounds (murmuring voices, clinking)
Cellular phone (road noise, alternator whine)
Portable phone (typical hum)
4. Call 911 immediately and report bomb threat and provide any information
requested by enforcement agency. Notify Public Safety Department at
2111.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 14
Reporting an Emergency
1. In an emergency call 911 or Mall Security at (760)250-2172.
2. An emergency is any situation that requires immediate police, fire, or medical
response to preserve life or property. If 911 is dialed from a campus phone,
Public Safety Department and the local Police and/or Fire will respond. On
Westfield Mall PaCE campus, Mall Security is the first emergency response
agency and the 911 liaison.
3. Call Mall Security to report problems such as:
 Assault or immediate danger of assault
 Chemical spills
 Crimes in Progress
 Explosives
 Fires
 Severe injuries or illnesses
 Someone choking
 Unusual odors
 Person out of control
 Other emergencies
4. If you are calling on a campus phone, Public Safety Department will respond
to your call directly and route it to the local police, fire, ambulance, and other
services, as needed. Mall Security will meet the emergency responders and
direct them to the proper location. You can also use any pay phone or any
phone to report a campus emergency. When reporting an emergency, be
prepared to give the following information:
 Location of the emergency – directions, street address, building, and
room.
 Type and severity of the emergency, e.g.,
o Fire – type and size of fire
o Medical – type of illness or injury, cause, number of victims.
o Police/crime – type of crime, description of suspects and their
direction of travel.
o Chemical/hazardous materials – quantity and type of
substances involved, hazards and injuries.
 When the incident occurred.
 Your name, location and phone number.
4. Call from a safe location, if possible. Remain calm. Speak slowly and
clearly, do not hang up the phone until the dispatcher tells you to.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 15
Medical and Mental Health Emergencies
Call Mall Security (760)250-2172 or 911, in any
emergency that requires immediate police, fire, or medical response to
preserve a life. This includes:
 Serious injury or illness
 Serious mental health issues that might lead to suicide,
assault, or homicide.
 Mental Health Emergency notify the Counseling Center at
760-773-2521 or the Campus Clinical Psychologist at
760- 862-1304 and tell the staff that this is an urgent crisis
matter.
Injuries
After calling 911 or Mall Security (760)250-2172:
 You may provide first aid: if you are trained; if it is safe to do
so; and, the victim consents.
 Do not move an injured person unless it is absolutely
necessary to prevent further injury.
 Calmly assure the injured person that help is on the way.
 Assist emergency personnel in locating the victim and
investigating the incident.
For all injuries, the Public Safety Department will complete a College of the
Desert Incident Report. This includes campus visitors, as well as students,
faculty and staff.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 16
Animal Incidents
1. Any direct physical contact with an unknown animal, especially if it
results in a bite or scratch, could have serious consequences. Such
contact should be reported to Mall Security at (760)250-2172
immediately. Only trained animal technicians should handle animals.
2. Any animal that is wandering loose on campus should be reported
immediately to Mall Security (760)250-2172. If a wild animal, such as
a bat or a raccoon is inside a building, try to safely isolate it in a room
by closing doors behind it and keeping people away.
Venomous Animals
In the case of a bite, or other injury caused by a venomous animal (e.g.
a black widow or a brown recluse spider) or an allergic reaction to an
insect or other animal, call (760)250-2172 or 911 immediately for
emergency medical assistance.
 Be prepared to give your name, location, and, if possible, the
species or type of animal involved.
 Try to remove the affected person and yourself from danger.
Tell others to vacate the area if a dangerous animal may still be
nearby.
 Help the victim immobilize the bite area, and make the victim as
comfortable as possible until medical or other assistance
arrives.
 If possible keep the spider, insect, etc. for an I.D.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 17
Crime Reporting
1. Report a crime or criminal behavior in progress on campus to Mall
Security: (760)250-2172
2. Do not approach or attempt to apprehend the person(s) involved. Take
only actions necessary for self-defense. If you are safe, stay where you
are until the police arrive. Otherwise try to move to a safe location.
Provide as much information as you can, including:
 Type of crime or criminal behavior
 Location of crime or criminal behavior
 Description of persons (height, weight, sex, descent, and
clothing) and type weapons involved.
 Direction the suspect was last seen traveling
 Vehicle description (color, make, year, model and license
number).
3. To report non-emergency police related activities, including crimes
that are no longer in progress, missing property, minor auto accidents
without injuries, disabled vehicles etc., call Mall Security at (760)250-
2172.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 18
Violent Situations
1. Your actions may help calm a potentially violent situation, or they may
escalate the problem. Try to behave in a manner that helps calm a
situation.
 Stay calm. Don’t be in a hurry.
 Be empathetic. Show you are concerned.
 Try to have the other person and yourself sit down. Sitting is
a less aggressive position.
 Try to be helpful. For example, schedule an appointment for a
later time.
 Give positive-outcome statements, such as “We can get this
straightened out.”
 Give positive feedback for continued talking, such as, “I’m
glad you’re telling me how you feel.”
 Stay out of arms’ reach.
 Have limited eye contact.
 Take notes.
2. Avoid Exacerbating Behavior
 Do not patronize.
 Do not yell or argue
 Do not joke or be sarcastic.
 Do not touch the person.
3. If Someone Becomes Agitated
 Leave the scene immediately, if possible. Call Mall Security
from a safe place.
 Or, try to alert a co-worker that there is a problem; e.g. by calling
and using an agreed-upon code word or signal to indicate
trouble.
4. Practice Preventive Measures
 Discuss and agree on circumstances and situations in the
workplace that everyone should watch out for. Have
procedures, signals, and code words in place to deal with
threatening situations.
 Avoid scheduling appointments for a time when no one else is
in the area. Alert your colleagues in advance about a difficult
meeting, and keep the door to the room open, or meet in a
public area.
 Try to avoid working alone after hours. If you have to work late,
advise a colleague, friend or family member.
Emergency Response Guide Westfield Mall-PaCE – January 2019 19
 When working after office hours, keep doors locked and do not
open the door unless you are expecting someone.
 If you are concerned for your safety after hours and desire
transportation to your vehicle, contact Mall Security (760)250-
2172. Report any strange or unusual activities in and around
your workplace immediately to your supervisor and Mall
Security (760)250-2172.
 Do not leave money or valuable belongings out in the open.
Purses should be locked in a desk, cabinet, or safe area. If
possible leave your purse locked in the trunk of your vehicle.
 Lock your office and/or lab doors when these areas are not in
use, even when you are leaving for “just a moment.”
 Always walk in well-lighted areas and know your surroundings.
If you think you are being followed, do not go home; go where
there are other people. Call the police as soon as possible.
 Always evaluate the situation and use good judgment


During campus emergencies, it’s vital that students and faculty are prepared to react quickly.

Recent emergency situations in schools and on school campuses have caused many schools to re-evaluate their lockdown procedures. A school lockdown is issued when there’s a threat to students, school staff and faculty.

Most campuses have different categories of school lockdown procedures. Types of lockdowns include:

Shelter-in-place: Usually an external health hazard where building evacuations are not recommended.
Internal threat: This threat exists when the danger is inside of the school or campus. The goal of this procedure should be to keep everyone safe until the threat is completely removed.
External threat: This type of threat occurs outside of the school building or campus. The goal of this lockdown is to prevent the threat from entering the school or campus.
Full lockdown:This scenario involves a serious threat that requires immediate action.
The types of events that require lockdowns include situations such as:

Active shooter
Hostage situation
Riots
Police activity nearby
National disasters
Bomb threats
Dangerous animals spotted nearby
Reports of a weapon or drug paraphernalia
School lockdown procedures require the cooperation of the faculty, staff and students. While every school will have its own unique set of rules in its lockdown procedure, the following are general guidelines and best practices for having an effective lockdown.

What’s the difference between a soft and hard lockdown?
Depending on the severity of the nearby threat, you may end up implementing either a soft lockdown or a hard lockdown. Soft lockdowns typically occur when there’s a nearby or external threat outside of the school, while immediate threats to the school trigger hard lockdowns.

During a soft lockdown, students and teachers may be encouraged to stay out of the hallways and inside classrooms or be allowed to move through the school, but not leave the school until the lockdown is lifted.

Soft lockdowns happen when the threat is external from the school and usually suggests no impending risk to students, so classes should continue.

Your school may have a soft lockdown if there’s a nearby law enforcement emergency, if the school is looking for a particular student, or if there’s a disturbance outside the building.

Hard lockdowns happen when there’s a more direct danger to the school or campus. Administrative staff and students should remain locked inside classrooms. Hard lockdowns can require additional precautions, like avoiding windows and doors and waiting for rescue.

Examples of a hard lockdown include an active shooter situation or if someone finds a weapon on school grounds.

Are school lockdown drills required?
School lockdown drills are required in most public schools, private elementary and secondary schools, but not all of them.

For example, Texas laws indicate that lockdowns should be performed twice a year and once per semester. New York state requires four lockdown drills a year. The frequency and number of times required in your school district may differ.

Practicing a lockdown drill can teach students and faculty how to prepare and react to a lockdown, reduce panic and maximize safety if one does happen.

What should faculty and staff do during a lockdown?
A school lockdown can be a scary experience. That’s why practicing these procedures can help prepare the administrative staff and students for what to do if a school lockdown is necessary.

Establish whether a soft lockdown is appropriate. If it’s deemed necessary, the school faculty and student body should be alerted, as well as any local authorities and parents or guardians of the students.

When emergency planning for a soft lockdown, it’s essential that the teachers designate safety or security officers for crisis management. These people will help create procedures that apply during an emergency and determine whether the school will need to go into a soft or hard lockdown.

Every school’s lockdown procedure will be a little different, but there are likely a few things they’ll all have in common:

Close and lock all doors and windows immediately. If you can’t lock a door, attempt to quickly block it with heavy items, like a bookcase or chairs.
If any students remain in the hallways, bring them into the classroom, even if they aren’t one of your students.
Account for every student in the room. You should notify the school administrators and main office of any missing students or tell them if you brought in extra students from the halls.
Assist those with special needs.
Never open doors or windows unless ordered to do so by a safety or school official. Always ask for documentation from authorized personnel to confirm their identity.
Turn off all lights and close the blinds or curtains.
Instruct all students to stay low and away from the windows and doors.
Keep students quiet and out of sight of the doorway inside the classroom.
Silence televisions, cell phones and other electronics.
Everyone should remain indoors and under lockdown until it’s “all clear.” Your school will announce once the lockdown is done or a designated official or law enforcement officer might come around to each classroom to lift the lockdown once the campus is cleared.

Things will be a little different if you’re in a soft lockdown situation. A soft lockdown might be ordered if the threat isn’t immediate and on your campus. Teachers and students should remain calm.

You’ll likely have designated personnel or safety officers to meet and delegate crisis management. These people may also be responsible for securing entry points throughout the school.

Just like a hard lockdown, teachers want to ensure all students are inside the classroom and accounted for. They’ll also want to make a note of any other students they brought into the classroom to the office admin.

Students should stay in place, and teachers shouldn’t write any bathroom or office passes. If a student has an emergency and needs to go somewhere, notify the main office so the student can get a chaperone.

Once the principal announces that lifting the soft lockdown is safe, classes can go on as scheduled.

Of course, these step-by-step instructions are a general list of suggestions. Ultimately, you want to ensure you’re following your school’s lockdown procedures.

What should students do during a school lockdown?
Students may become agitated or anxious during a lockdown, so it’s important to try your best to remain calm. Lockdown drills can help students and teachers plan a course of action during a potential lockdown. Faculty and students should discuss potential meeting points within the school for hazardous weather and what to do if an intruder or active shooter procedure is followed.

If you believe someone is simply pulling a prank, alert a faculty member or staff immediately.

If a student is outside a classroom, they should immediately move towards the nearest lockable room.
Remain quiet, still, calm and alert.
Follow all instructions from the teacher.
Only use cellular devices if it’s an emergency or if instructed to do so.
Wait to get the all-clear from an official announcement or police officer.
Schools should have practice drills throughout the school year to familiarize students and staff with emergency procedures. Knowing the lockdown procedures and taking the practice drills seriously can keep you and others safe.

It’s also important to note that protocols will be different between elementary school and middle or high school lockdown procedures. Special consideration should be taken when planning lockdown drills for younger children.

For more information on what to do in an emergency, please visit our resource center for more safety tips and information.

5 school lockdown scenarios
There are many lockdown scenarios to consider between both hard and soft lockdowns.

1. What should you do if a lockdown occurs, but you’re not near a classroom?

It would be best if you moved towards the nearest classroom so you can shelter in place behind a locked door. The teacher will take note of your name and share it with the faculty.

2. Where should you go if a lockdown happens and you’re outside for P.E.?

All students should calmly return to the building through the closest doorway. If you enter the property through the gym, seek out the locker rooms or other areas you can lock. If that’s not possible, the gym teacher should have a designated safety corner in the gym.

3. Where would you go if a lockdown happens during lunchtime?

Where you’ll go depends on how many students are in the cafeteria and where the closest locked room is located. This could be the kitchen, pantry, gym or other lockable classrooms. A faculty member may even remove the students through the nearest exit, depending on the lockdown situation.

4. Where should you go during a lockdown if you’re a visitor?

If you’re already in a locked room, stay put. If you’re not, calmly head towards the closest classroom or lockable room and wait until you get the all-clear.

5. Where should you go during a lockdown if you’re in the hallway?

Go to the nearest classroom so that you can be locked in with the other students. You should follow the protocols of that teacher. The teacher will note your name and share it with the school administrators.   
Active Shooter Attack Prevention and Preparedness (ASAPP)
What is Active Shooter Attack Prevention and Preparedness (ASAPP)?
Active Shooter Attack Prevention and Preparedness (ASAPP) is a two-hour course created by the FBI Office of Partner Engagement’s Violence Reduction Unit.

The goal of ASAPP training is to empower participants with the knowledge and skills necessary to survive an active shooter incident in any environment (i.e., an office, shopping center, house of worship, school, or government building). ASAPP combines lessons learned from years of research into active shooter incidents with interactive training techniques to create a concise, impactful, and relevant course.

During the course, attendees actively participate in a live and informative multimedia presentation. Additionally, they observe in-person demonstrations, then complete two scenarios to practice the decision-making process and actions necessary to survive an active shooter incident.

Participants learn why federal agencies chose the “Run, Hide, Fight” protocol as the national standard for civilian response to an active shooter incident.

Participants learn “Run, Hide, Fight” techniques and have the opportunity to practice them, reinforcing training principles.

They also learn and practice procedures to control bleeding and otherwise assist the injured until proper medical care becomes available. This interactive, options-based training helps participants remember lifesaving techniques if they are faced with such an attack.

Based on the nature of this course, the maximum class size is 40 participants. Experienced instructors are on-hand to ensure the training is conducted in a safe environment. No real or fake firearms are used during the scenarios. This course is carefully designed to instruct and teach without causing fear or apprehension.
BE PREPARED FOR AN
ACTIVE
SHOOTER
FEMA V-1000/March 2018
Recent national tragedies
remind us that the risk is
real. Taking a few steps now
can help you react quickly
when every second counts.
An active shooter is an individual engaged
in attempting to kill people in a confined
space or populated area. Active shooters
typically use firearms and have no
pattern to their selection of victims. Can happen anywhere Can happen anytime
IF YOU ARE INVOLVED IN
AN ACTIVE SHOOTER INCIDENT
If you see something,
say something.®
Before you run, know the exits.
Find a place to hide.
Learn first aid skills so
you can help others.
Help law enforcement.
Seek help to cope with trauma.
EXIT EXIT
Run Hide Fight
HOW TO STAY SAFE
WHEN AN ACTIVE SHOOTER THREATENS
Prepare
NOW
If you see suspicious activity, let an
authority know right away.
Different places, such as your school,
workplace, or house of worship
may have plans in place to help you
respond safely. Ask about these
plans and get familiar with them. If
you participate in an active shooter
drill, talk with your family about what
you learned and how to apply it to
other locations.
When you visit a building such as a
shopping mall or healthcare facility,
take time to identify two nearby exits.
Get in the habit of doing this.
Map out places to hide. In rooms
without windows, behind solid
doors with locks, under desks, or
behind heavy furniture such as
large filing cabinets can make good
hiding places.
Sign up for active shooter, first aid,
and tourniquet taraining. Learn how to
help others by taking FEMA’s You Are
the Help Until Help Arrives
course. Learn more at
Ready.gov/until-help-arrives.
Survive
DURING
RUN. Getting away from the shooter
or shooters is the top priority. Leave
your things behind and run away. If
safe to do so, warn others nearby.
Call 911 when you are safe. Describe
each shooter, their locations,
and weapons.
HIDE. If you cannot get away safely,
find a place to hide. Get out of the
shooter’s view and stay very quiet.
Silence your electronic devices and
make sure they won’t vibrate. Lock
and block doors, close blinds, and
turn off the lights. Do not hide in
groups—spread out along walls or
hide separately to make it more
difficult for the shooter. Try to
communicate with police silently—
such as through text messages or by
putting a sign in an exterior window.
Stay in place until law enforcement
gives you notice that all immediate
danger is clear.
FIGHT. Your last resort when you
are in immediate danger is to defend
yourself. Commit to your actions and
act aggressively to stop the shooter.
Ambushing the shooter together
with makeshift weapons such as
chairs, fire extinguishers, scissors,
and books can distract and disarm
the shooter.
Be Safe
AFTER
Keep hands visible and empty.
Know that law enforcement’s first
task is to end the incident. They may
have to pass injured persons along
the way.
Follow law enforcement’s
instructions and evacuate in the
direction they tell you to.
Consider seeking professional help
for you and your family to cope with
the long-term effects of trauma.
Take an Active Role
in Your Safety
Go to Ready.gov/
public-spaces. Download
the FEMA app to get
more information
about preparing for
an active shooter. FEMA V-1000

How to Respond When an Active Shooter is in Your Vicinity
Quickly determine the most reasonable way to protect your life -- run, hide or fight. Seconds count.

RUN
If there is an accessible escape path, evacuate. Act quickly to put as much distance between yourself and the shooter as possible.

Have an escape route and plan in mind
GO, regardless of whether others agree to follow
Leave your belongings
Keep your hands visible and empty¬†
Help others escape, if possible
Prevent individuals from entering an area where the active shooter may be
Do not attempt to move wounded people
Call 911 when it's safe to do so
HIDE
If you cannot escape, find a place to hide and barricade yourself.

Choose a place that is out of view
Lock the door and block it with heavy furniture or office equipment
Hide behind solid objects away from the door
If possible, choose a place that doesn't trap you or restrict your options to move
Turn off lights and computers
Silence your phone and keep quiet
Call 911 if it's safe; if you can't speak, just stay on the line
FIGHT
As a last resort, and only if your life is in danger and you cannot flee, attempt to take the shooter down. Your chance of survival is greater if you try to incapacitate the shooter by:

Acting as aggressivley as possible
Throwing items and improvising weapons
Yelling
Committing to your actions
¬†

When Law Enforcement Arrives
Law enforcement will act to stop the active shooter as soon as possible. Officers will proceed directly to where the last shots were heard.

Officers may be armed with many weapons and may wear tactical equipment
Officers may shout commands and push people to the ground for their safety
The first officers on the scene will not stop to help injured persons
How to react when officers arrive:

Remain calm and follow instructions
Keep hands visible and empty
Avoid any quick movements toward officers; avoid pointing
Do not attempt to stop officers to ask for help
Evacuate in the direction from which officers are entering the premises



After the 1999 Columbine High School shooting incident, lockdown drills have become an integral part of school safety planning, with over 98% of U.S. public K12 schools conducting them annually.

With the rise in school-based threats, from active shooters to violent intrusions, the question isn’t if schools should conduct drills—but how to do them in a way that truly protects students without creating unnecessary trauma.

Unlike traditional fire or weather drills, lockdown procedures involve staying in place, securing classrooms, and preparing for worst-case scenarios.

But how do you run these drills without causing panic?
How do you balance preparedness with student mental health?
And how do you make sure the protocol is effective?
While drills are essential, poor execution can lead to confusion, anxiety, or even harm. In this blog, let’s walk through the key components of an effective, trauma-informed lockdown drill procedure for K12 schools and the best practices for school lockdown drills in 2025.

What Is a School Lockdown Drill?
A school lockdown drill is an emergency protocol used when there is a threat inside or near the school building. Unlike traditional fire drills, students and staff are instructed to stay inside, lock doors, turn off lights, and remain silent and out of sight instead of evacuating, which could be dangerous. The goal is to reduce visibility and movement until law enforcement clears the threat.

These simulations train students, teachers, and staff to respond quickly and calmly during high-risk situations like active shooter events. The rise in school shootings has made these drills more necessary than ever, changing how schools prepare for emergencies.

The objective isn’t to cause fear but to build preparedness. When drills are trauma-informed and age-appropriate, they can help students and staff respond with clarity, not panic. Getting these drills right for school leaders or safety coordinators is about more than compliance: protecting lives in the moments that matter most.

Lockdown, Lockout, and Shelter-in-place: What’s the difference?
Understanding the difference between lockdown, lockout, and shelter-in-place is key to making the right call during emergencies. While all three aim to keep students and staff safe, the type of threat determines the response.

A lockdown is used when there’s a direct threat inside or very close to the school—such as an intruder or active shooter. In this case, classrooms are locked, lights are turned off, and everyone stays quiet and out of sight.
A lockout is a response to danger outside the school building, such as police activity in the area. The doors are locked, but inside, classes continue as usual. The goal is to keep the threat out.
Shelter-in-place is used when there’s a risk from the environment—like a chemical spill, storm, or nearby fire. Everyone stays indoors, sometimes sealing doors and windows, until the danger passes.
Each drill prepares the school community to act quickly and calmly, depending on the type of threat. Knowing the difference helps school staff make faster, more informed decisions—and helps students understand what’s happening and why.

How Does a Lockdown Drill Work?
Lockdown drills at school are planned to prepare students and staff for dangerous situations, particularly active shooter scenarios. These drills help everyone understand what to do when faced with a threat, offering a structured, practised response to minimize chaos and improve safety. Below is how a lockdown drills at school works, from the alert to post-drill follow-ups -

Initiating the Lockdown
When a potential threat is identified, an authorized individual (school principal or security officer) initiates the lockdown procedure. This can be communicated via a loud alarm, a public address announcement, or another pre-established system. Quick, clear communication is key to signalling everyone to take immediate action.

Securing the Facility, Locking Down, and Staying Hidden
Once the lockdown is announced, the priority is to secure the building, creating an environment where no one can be seen or heard.

Doors: All doors, including classroom doors and any other entry points, are immediately locked. Electronic and physical security measures may be used to block access. If doors can't be locked, barricades are used to prevent entry.
Lights: Lights are turned off to reduce visibility from outside.
Silence: To avoid detection, everyone is instructed to stay quiet without talking or moving.
Taking Shelter at Safe Spots and Staying Put
In the Classroom: Students and staff move away from windows and doors to stay out of view. They may be instructed to sit, hide under desks, crouch in corners, or hide behind objects that can shield them from potential danger.
In Other Areas: Staff and students in hallways or open spaces should seek shelter in nearby rooms or hide behind furniture, if possible.
Silence is paramount during this phase—phones should be silenced, and no one should move until it's safe.

Holding the Position Until it’s Safe
The lockdown doesn’t end until an authority figure gives the "all clear" signal. This may come after the situation is resolved or the threat is no longer present. Until that signal is given, everyone stays quiet and awaits further instructions.

Debriefing After the Drill to Learn and Improve
Once the situation is confirmed as safe, authorities will lift the lockdown and provide clear directions on how to exit the area or return to normal activities. This is followed by a debriefing session, where staff and students review how the drill went, what worked well and where improvements can be made. The emotional impacts are discussed as well—lockdown drills can be stressful, and offering counselling or group discussions afterwards helps students process their emotions.

Importance of Lockdown Drill at Schools
In an age where school safety is constantly scrutinised, lockdown drills have become indispensable tools to protect students, staff, and the broader community. They are the foundation for a school’s emergency response, helping everyone involved—from administrators to first responders—work in unison during critical moments.

Building Muscle Memory for Swift Action
When an emergency strikes, there is no time for confusion or second-guessing. One of the primary goals of lockdown drills is to build muscle memory. When a school community practices lockdown procedures regularly, it becomes second nature for staff and students to know exactly what to do without hesitation.

They lock doors, turn off lights, remain silent, and seek safety. This kind of preparedness is critical when every second counts in an emergency.

Improving Coordination and Communication
A successful response during a crisis depends on clear communication and coordinated action. Lockdown drills bring together the school community (staff, students, emergency responders, etc.) to practice these skills under pressure.

They learn how to communicate in moments of panic and act as a unified team. Whether teachers guide students to safe areas or staff coordinate with local law enforcement, each person knows their role in the process. With this, effective teamwork can make all the difference during a real emergency.

Addressing the Psychological Impact of Violence
A significant part of lockdown drills is physical safety and addressing students' emotional well-being. Research shows that students exposed to bullying or violence may feel unsafe at school, leading to anxiety & depression, which can negatively impact their mental health and academic performance.

However, in a survey of 8,600 students, those who participated in lockdown drills reported feeling more confident in their ability to handle emergencies despite past exposure to violence. Regular drills help alleviate anxiety by empowering students with the knowledge that they are prepared for the unexpected. This reinforces the value of lockdown drills, even for students who have already been exposed to violence.

Identifying Areas for Improvement
Post-drill evaluations are essential in refining emergency preparedness plans. They expose weaknesses in communication systems, physical security measures, and staff training. Schools can use these evaluations to identify areas that need improvement and make necessary adjustments. This continuous cycle of practice and review ensures that schools are better prepared for all types of emergencies—internal or external.

How to Conduct an Effective Lockdown Drill
Pre-Drill Communication and Transparency
No matter how well-designed a lockdown drill may be, its success starts with how it’s introduced. Before the drill begins, communicating clearly with students, staff, and families is essential.

Always begin with a direct and repeated message over the PA system:

“Lockdown. Locks, Lights, Out of Sight. This is a drill.”

This short, clear announcement helps avoid confusion and assures everyone understands what’s happening. Without this clarification, there's a real risk of panic, including calls to emergency responders or media attention.

Being transparent builds trust. Parents should be informed in advance. This allows them to talk to their children, address fears, and help ease nervousness. Students, especially younger ones, cope better when they understand what’s happening and why.

It also shows that the school values open communication and collaboration while reassuring families that it’s a process involving everyone. When people are prepared, they respond better; that difference matters in emergencies.

Involvement of Law Enforcement
As lockdown drills are not just internal exercises, they do need the input and support of local law enforcement. Their presence brings valuable experience that helps shape procedures that work in real-world scenarios.

Before holding any drill, schools should check what state and district policies require. Many areas have clear rules about how often drills should be held, what steps must be followed, and how the process should be documented. Ignoring these rules can lead to confusion—or even legal consequences.

Working with law enforcement early on helps align school safety plans with local standards. Officers can walk through the drill, offer feedback, and point out weak spots that staff may overlook. This collaboration also builds familiarity between school staff and first responders, which can help when real emergencies happen.

In schools, contacting law enforcement immediately during an actual lockdown usually makes sense. School leaders know their environment and trust their staff to make that call when needed. They help schools prepare in a way that reflects how events unfold, not just how they’re planned.

Role of Surveillance & Intercom Systems
Modern school safety relies on more than just locked doors. A well-equipped school lockdown plan needs strong surveillance and communication systems that support fast action and clear coordination.

At the centre of this setup is a control room where staff can view security footage, trigger alarms, lock doors remotely, and communicate with everyone on campus. This centralized access helps schools respond quickly, guide students and staff safely, and give emergency responders the information they need as events unfold.

Today’s systems do more than record video. Many schools are upgrading to smart surveillance tools that use built-in advanced features. These include

AI search functions to scan footage easily,
Facial Recognition to flag known individuals or strangers on campus,
Gun Detection to identify visible weapons,
License Plate Recognition at entry points to track who comes and goes,
Safety Alerts & Productivity Monitoring to notify staff about unusual behaviour or patterns that may need attention
Night vision cameras to keep the campus covered even after dark.
When used properly, these tools don’t just respond to threats—they help schools stay a step ahead and act faster and more clearly.

Classroom Protocols and Barricading Tips
In a lockdown drill at school, what happens inside the classroom often determines the outcome. When evacuation isn’t possible, securing the room is the top priority. Most active shooter incidents last less than five minutes, while law enforcement response can take four to eleven minutes. That gap belongs to teachers and students—what they do matters.

Locking the classroom door is the first step. But many doors swing outward and can only be locked from the outside, putting teachers or students at risk. Additionally, substitute teachers may not have keys, and panic makes even simple actions harder. These seconds are too valuable to lose.

That’s why many schools now use lockdown devices that let teachers lock doors quickly and safely from the inside without needing the keys. Once the door is locked, turn off the lights, stay low, and out of sight. A dark, silent room is often enough to make an intruder move on.

Moreover, Barricading should be minimal, as loud, heavy furniture movements waste time and draw attention. Focus on fast, quiet steps like locking the door, hiding, staying quiet, and calling for help if possible. Keeping the plan simple helps everyone act quickly when every second counts.

Common Mistakes to Avoid During School Lockdown Drills
Failing to practice them regularly can confuse when an actual emergency occurs.
Access points such as doors and windows should always be secured but often overlooked during drills.
Not reinforcing the lockdown protocol can leave students and staff uncertain about what to do.
Coordination with local law enforcement and first responders is essential to simulate realistic emergency responses, yet many schools neglect this.
Allowing movement in hallways or between rooms during lockdowns can also be dangerous.
Rushing through a drill without understanding the importance of calm, careful action can undermine the entire purpose of the exercise.
Not conducting a thorough post-drill review can prevent valuable improvements from being made for future safety drills.
How Surveillance and Access Control Systems Support Lockdowns
When a lockdown is in motion, every second and every decision matters. At these moments, surveillance and access control systems work together to give schools, offices, and extensive facilities better control when faced with a potential threat. While supporting lockdowns, these systems also shape how well they’re handled in real-time.

Real-Time Monitoring
Real-time monitoring gives staff eyes across the property at once. Cameras placed at entry points, hallways, and around the perimeter show what’s happening as it unfolds—no guesswork, no waiting. Security teams can spot a threat before it reaches the building, monitor movement inside, and use the footage to guide emergency response. Coram’s surveillance systems also offer facial recognition, gun detection, safety & productivity alerts, which further help identify any details or suspicious activity near entrances. This allows for faster, smarter decisions under pressure.

Remote Door Locking
Many facilities today use access control systems with keycards, door stations, or mobile entry—all of which can restrict movement inside a building, forcing an intruder to lose time and direction. During a lockdown, the ability to lock every door from a central panel or mobile phone removes the need to send someone into harm’s way.

Integration with Emergency Tools
Integrating surveillance and access controls with other emergency tools ties everything together. Modern access control doesn’t work in isolation—it connects with alarms, PA systems, and emergency communication platforms. Schools can alert law enforcement, trigger lockdown measures, and lock every door with one action. Instead of scrambling, staff can follow a clear path forward.

Conclusion
School lockdown drills are essential for preparing K–12 schools for emergencies. While they don’t address the root causes of violence, they provide a clear action plan when safety is the priority. To make these drills effective, focus on key components:

Clear pre-drill communication with staff and students to reduce panic & build understanding,
Involving local law enforcement for realistic response procedures,
Surveillance and intercom systems for early threat detection and campus-wide communication,
Classroom protocols such as silent barricading, lockdown positions, etc.,
Modern surveillance and access control systems, like those from Coram, allow administrators to monitor and restrict entries, lock down buildings remotely, alert security or emergency responders, and more, saving time.
By practising regularly and integrating these systems, schools can build a proactive safety culture where everyone is prepared to act quickly and safely.




Coram Logo
Log In
Try for free
Back
ALICE Training for Schools: A Complete Guide to Active Shooter Response
Still using old lockdown drills? ALICE Training teaches schools to act fast with real-time, age-appropriate response strategies that replace panic with a plan.

Stu Waters
Stu Waters
Apr 23, 2025
linkedin
Twitter

What if hiding under desks isn’t enough?

Most schools still rely on lockdown-only drills – an outdated response the Department of Education moved away from years ago. In critical moments, waiting passively can cost lives. That’s why more schools are adopting ALICE Training, a proactive, options-based strategy built to improve real outcomes.

This guide breaks down how ALICE works and why it’s becoming the new standard in school safety:

What ALICE Training is and how it improves emergency response
Key differences from traditional lockdown drills
Implementation, certification, and how to prepare your school community
What is ALICE Training?
ALICE stands for Alert, Lockdown, Inform, Counter, Evacuate. It’s a response framework developed to help schools and organizations react more effectively during active shooter incidents.

Unlike passive lockdown protocols, ALICE teaches people how to make informed, split-second decisions to improve their chances of survival.

It’s not about teaching kids to fight. It’s about giving them age-appropriate options—like when to hide, how to escape, or how to create distractions if there's no other choice. ALICE Training is structured, scenario-based, and trauma-informed.

It replaces fear with action. Panic with a plan.


Why ALICE Training Matters for School Safety
Most active shooter incidents are over in minutes.

According to an FBI-supported study, 60% of events between 2000 and 2013 ended before law enforcement could even arrive. That leaves schools alone in the most critical window when decisions matter most.


                                                      Image source: Active Shooter Incidents in the US

That’s where ALICE steps in.

It equips schools to act during those first moments—when staff and students are already facing the threat. The training focuses on helping individuals assess the situation and respond with the best option available, whether that’s locking down, evacuating, or creating a distraction.

But not all experts agree on how far that training should go.

Ken Trump, a school safety specialist, argues that expecting untrained children to take action under pressure is unrealistic and potentially dangerous. He emphasizes that staff, not students, should be the ones making split-second decisions.

Here’s where ALICE can still bring value:

It provides clear, age-appropriate response options for different scenarios
It replaces passive drills with realistic training that improves recall under stress
It aligns with updated federal safety guidance, helping reduce legal and reputational risk
Training alone won’t prevent violence—but it can help people inside the building respond faster, with more control, and with a better chance of saving lives.

How ALICE Training for Schools Differs from Traditional Methods
Most traditional lockdown drills follow a simple script: turn off the lights, lock the doors, stay silent, and wait. That approach was never designed for modern threats, it was built for different times, different dangers.

ALICE changes that by recognizing one simple truth: not every threat looks the same, so the response shouldn’t either.

Instead of a one-size-fits-all protocol, ALICE trains staff and students to assess the situation and choose the best option whether that means locking down, evacuating, or disrupting the attacker’s ability to cause harm.

Here’s how ALICE stands apart:

It’s dynamic, not passive
Lockdowns are still part of the plan but not the only option. ALICE adds layers like communication, movement, and distraction, depending on the situation.

It focuses on decision-making, not just compliance
Staff and older students are taught to think on their feet, not freeze and wait for instruction. This helps reduce confusion and panic in high-stress moments.

It includes training for the whole school
ALICE offers tailored approaches for everyone from teachers and bus drivers to support staff and students with special needs.
Traditional drills aim to contain. ALICE trains for response because containment alone doesn’t stop an active shooter.

Benefits of ALICE Training for Schools
ALICE builds real-world readiness into your safety plans. It goes beyond checklists and prepares people to act under pressure.

Key outcomes:

Staff and students gain clarity on what to do in different scenarios
Drills and training improve response time and coordination
Adoption signals that your school is following state and federal best practices, reducing liability
A school that trains together responds faster, smarter, and with more control when every second matters.

The Role of Active Shooter Response Training in Schools
Safety plans on paper don’t save lives; training does.

Active shooter response training plays a direct role in reducing casualties by preparing staff and students to act before law enforcement arrives. More than half of active shooter events end within minutes. If a school isn’t trained to respond in that window, it’s not truly prepared.

Training also helps schools:

Identify weak points in existing protocols
Build consistency across campuses
Improve communication flow during emergencies
Active shooter training gives schools a way to close the gap between the first sign of danger and the moment help arrives.

Most incidents are over in minutes. Without training, that window is lost to panic and confusion.

What this training really does is turn a written emergency plan into something people can actually execute under stress, with urgency, and with purpose.

Response Techniques for Students and Staff
ALICE customizes response techniques based on age, role, and ability. Teachers won’t receive the same instruction as second graders—and that’s intentional.

For students:

Younger kids focus on listening to adults, locking doors, and staying quiet
Older students learn when to move, how to escape, and how to create distractions if absolutely necessary
All student training is age-appropriate and trauma-informed
For staff:

Educators, administrators, and support staff are trained to lead under pressure
Real-world scenarios help them learn how to decide between locking down, evacuating, or countering
Hands-on training improves muscle memory and reduces freeze response
Effective response looks different depending on who you are and where you are in the building.

ALICE provides clear, age-appropriate guidance:

Students learn how to follow instructions, move to safety, or create distance from danger
Staff train on making real-time decisions, giving clear directions, and leading evacuations when needed
Everyone from bus drivers to cafeteria staff knows their role
This reduces hesitation and helps each person take action when it counts most.

Benefits of Proactive Protocols in Emergency Situations
Waiting passively during a crisis increases the risk of harm. Proactive training changes that by helping people take informed action, fast.

These protocols lead to:

Faster recognition of threats
More consistent communication across staff and students
Increased survival rates during critical incidents
A school that practices proactive response isn’t just prepared on paper; it’s ready in real life.

When schools train reactively, responses tend to be slow and uncertain. With proactive strategies like ALICE:

Staff know when to move and when to stay
Students aren’t left waiting for someone else to decide
Real-time information keeps everyone aligned with the situation as it unfolds
In an emergency, confusion kills time and time is everything. Proactive protocols shrink the gap between awareness and action.

Inside the ALICE Training Program
The ALICE program follows a blended learning model: online instruction for foundational knowledge, followed by in-person, scenario-based training. This format helps schools introduce the material at scale and reinforce it through hands-on application.

It includes role-specific modules for:

Educators
Administrators
Support staff (bus drivers, cafeteria staff, custodians)
Students, with adaptations for age and ability
The goal is to build consistency across your entire campus so everyone responds with the same language, the same logic, and a shared plan.

What Should Schools Expect During ALICE Training?
Expect a mix of eLearning, interactive discussions, and physical walkthroughs.

Instructors lead staff through real-world simulations like classroom evacuations, communication drills, and barricade techniques. Training sessions often include:

Scenario planning with different threat levels
Debriefs to reflect on decisions made
Safety planning tailored to each school’s layout and population
It’s not a one-time session. Schools that implement ALICE treat it as an evolving part of their safety culture – updated, practiced, and reinforced throughout the year.

Key Components of Active Shooter Training
ALICE breaks down emergency response into simple, trainable components that can be applied under stress:

Alert: Recognize the threat and communicate it immediately
Lockdown: Secure rooms quickly, with a plan to adapt if needed
Inform: Share real-time updates to guide better decision-making
Counter: Create distractions only when evacuation is not possible
Evacuate: Leave the danger zone using the fastest, safest path – even if it’s unconventional
Each step is backed by behavioral science and real-world case studies, not theory.

The Importance of Drills and Simulations
Knowing what to do is one thing. Practicing it is what makes it stick.

Drills help schools:

Test response plans under pressure
Identify weaknesses in layout or communication
Build muscle memory in students and staff
Schools that practice regularly respond faster and with fewer mistakes when it matters most. Drills aren’t about perfection. They’re about learning in motion.

Engaging Students and Staff in Response Training
Engagement starts with relevance. ALICE training meets each group where they are.

For staff, that means real scenarios and decision-making tools. For students, it means age-appropriate discussions that focus on following instructions and staying calm.

Tips for engagement:

Use visual aids, roleplay, and interactive exercises
Reinforce training throughout the year, not just once
Adapt the message for students with special needs or trauma histories
When people understand the why behind what they’re learning, they take training seriously and that’s what saves time and lives.

ALICE Training Certification: Is It Required?
Certification isn’t legally mandated in most states; but it’s quickly becoming an industry standard for schools serious about emergency preparedness.

There are two main certification paths:

ALICE Certified Instructor (ACI): For staff members who lead onsite training
eLearning Certification: For individuals who complete online ALICE courses
Having certified staff shows that your school is following recognized safety protocols and can reduce liability in the aftermath of an incident. It also ensures your training is consistent, up-to-date, and led by someone who understands both the content and the context.

If you're relying on in-house safety plans without certified training, you’re likely missing critical pieces.

Challenges in Implementing ALICE Training
Like any change in safety policy, ALICE can meet resistance—especially when it involves new behaviors or emotionally charged scenarios.

Here’s what schools often struggle with:

Parent concerns around teaching children to “counter” or move during an attack
Staff discomfort with deviating from traditional lockdown-only methods
Time and budget constraints for full training implementation
Lack of legal clarity in states without specific active shooter training regulations
What helps?

Clear communication. Schools that share the research, training goals, and safety priorities behind ALICE often get more support than pushback. Start with internal alignment, and build outward from there.

Want Safer Schools Without the Guesswork? Start here.
You’ve seen why outdated lockdown drills don’t cut it anymore and how ALICE Training fills the gap with options that actually prepare people for real emergencies.

ALICE replaces passive lockdowns with flexible, decision-ready strategies
Students and staff train to act – not freeze under pressure
Hands-on simulations improve recall and reduce confusion in critical moments
Certification builds legal protection and confidence across your campus
If your school’s safety plan still feels reactive or incomplete, Coram can help. From access control to surveillance, it’s built to work alongside protocols like ALICE – making safety smarter, faster, and more reliable.



